Permissions Documentation Updates (#3910)
mathesar-foundation/mathesar: docs/docs/user-guide/permissions.md

# Mathesar's Role-Based Permissions

Mathesar uses [PostgreSQL roles](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/user-manag.html) to manage permissions within a database. These roles define the actions users can perform, allowing fine-grained control over access.

## Roles vs Users

Each Mathesar user accesses a database through one PostgreSQL role — and the user's permissions are determined by the _role's_ permissions within PostgreSQL.

You can read more about [how users and roles work together](./users.md#users-vs-roles).

## Database Settings

Mathesar provides three main sections for role management within the database settings:

> - **Role Configuration**: Used to manage credentials (passwords) for roles that exist on the server. These roles can then be assigned to collaborators.

Author: 992b5fae7748504fd795637989b8b25097543961

> - **Role Configuration**: Used to manage credentials (passwords) for roles that exist on the server. These roles can then be assigned to collaborators.

Author: I've added references to PostgreSQL server to make this more clear.

> - **Collaborators**: This section allows you to add users and assign them configured roles, dictating their access levels within the database.

Author: This is updated now.

> - **Server Roles**: Here you can manage roles available on the server itself, defining inheritance, creating new roles, or deleting existing ones.

Author: I've added the section headings to the content to make this more consistent with the UI.

!!! note
    Role Configuration is Mathesar-specific, managing credentials for existing roles within a connected database. Server Roles, however, exist on the PostgreSQL server itself and affect all databases.

### Role Configuration

In the **Role Configuration** section, all [LOGIN roles](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/role-attributes.html#ROLE-ATTRIBUTES) that exist on the server are listed. These roles can then be assigned to collaborators once configured. A configured role has a password set.

- **Password Management**: For each role, you can configure or change the password directly within Mathesar.

> - **Remove Role Configuration**: You can remove role configurations from Mathesar as needed. This only removes the credentials, not the role from the server.

Author: I've updated these to match the UI. I did keep "Remove Role" since it's a more descriptive label.

> - **Remove Role Configuration**: You can remove role configurations from Mathesar as needed. This only removes the credentials, not the role from the server.

Author: This is updated.

### Collaborators

Collaborators are users who have been added to work on a database. Each collaborator is assigned a PostgreSQL LOGIN role that dictates their level of access to the database and its objects (schemas, tables, etc.).

- **Add Collaborators**: In the **Collaborators** section, you can add new users as collaborators to the database. When adding a collaborator, you assign them one of the roles that have been configured in Mathesar.

- **Remove Collaborators**: You can remove collaborators if they no longer require access to the database. The Mathesar user will still exist and you can add them back as a collaborator at a later time.

### Server Roles

> The **Server Roles** section, found under the **Settings** tab, shows the roles available on the server for the current database.

Author: I've updated this.

- **Define Child Roles**: PostgreSQL has a mechanism for [Role Membership](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/role-membership.html) wherein any role can be "granted" to any other role to form simple hierarchies or complex graph-based inheritance structures. For any role you've configured within Mathesar, you can use Mathesar to grant the role to other "child roles".
- **Drop Roles**: You can drop server-level roles that are no longer needed. This action removes the role from the server and all databases where it has been assigned. Exercise caution when dropping roles, as it may affect existing permissions and user access across multiple databases.

!!! note
    Server roles, once added, must be configured in Mathesar under the **Role Configuration** section before they can be assigned to collaborators.

---

## Permissions Management at Different Levels

Mathesar manages permissions at three levels:

1. **Database Level:** Managed from the database page.
2. **Schema Level:** Managed from the schema page.
3. **Table Level:** Managed from the inspector panel for each table.

### Ownership of Objects

> Owners of each object (database, schema, or table) can set permissions for other users. Ownership is determined by the user's assigned collaborator role in the database.

Reviewer: > Ownership is determined by the user's assigned collaborator role in the database

This statement is a bit confusing. It might be better to not include this line since we explain it below.

Author: I have removed this line.

When a new object (database, schema, or table) is created, the owner of the object is the collaborator who created it. This automatic ownership assignment allows the creator to have immediate and full control over the objects they create, including the ability to manage permissions and transfer ownership if needed.

### Database Permissions

Database permissions control access and actions at the database level.

> - **Owner**: Each database has an owner who has full control over the database, including managing permissions and transferring ownership.

Reviewer: > full control over the database

We shouldn't be calling this full control. It provides access only over the database, not on the objects inside the database. We need to make this clear.

Author: Changed all instances.

- **Granted Access**: Specific permissions can be granted to roles for various actions within the database.
- **Transfer Ownership**: The current owner can transfer ownership to another role, granting them full administrative control.

For each database, the following permission levels can be granted:

- **Connect**: Allows the role to access and connect to the database.
- **Create**: Includes Connect permissions and allows the role to create new schemas within the database.
- **Custom**: Enables the granular setting of permissions beyond the predefined options.

### Schema Permissions

Schema permissions control access and actions at the schema level.

- **Owner**: Each schema has an owner who has full control over the schema, including managing permissions and transferring ownership.
- **Granted Access**: Specific permissions can be granted to roles for various actions within the schema.

> - **Transfer Ownership**: The current owner can transfer ownership to another role, granting them full administrative control over the schema.

Reviewer: > full administrative control

Can we remove the word `full`?

`administrative control` sounds great!

Author: I've removed the word "full" from all instantances.

For each schema, the following permission levels can be granted:

- **Read**: Allows the role to access the schema and view its objects.
- **Create**: Includes Read permissions and allows the role to create new tables within the schema.
- **Custom**: Enables the granular setting of permissions beyond the predefined options.

### Table Permissions

Table permissions control access and actions at the table level.

- **Owner**: Each table has an owner who has full control over the table, including managing permissions, transferring ownership, and modifying the table's structure (such as adding, removing, or altering columns).
- **Granted Access**: Specific permissions can be granted to roles for various actions on the table.
- **Transfer Ownership**: The current owner can transfer ownership to another role, granting them full administrative control over the table.

For each table, the following permission levels can be granted:

- **Read**: Allows the role to access the table and read records.
- **Write**: Includes Read permissions and allows the role to insert, update, and delete records in the table.

> - **Custom**: Enables the granular setting of permissions beyond the predefined options.

Reviewer: We could include a link to the Postgres docs regarding the possible custom privileges.

Author: I've added a link to: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-priv.html

## Roles vs Users

Each Mathesar user accesses a database through one PostgreSQL role — and the user's permissions are determined by the _role's_ permissions within PostgreSQL.

You can read more about [how users and roles work together](./users.md#users-vs-roles).

## The Database "Settings" tab {:#database_settings}

Each database has its own page within Mathesar. And on that page you'll find a "Settings" tab where you can manage roles and collaborators.

### _In Mathesar:_ Role Configuration {:#role_configuration}

Use this section to manage the credentials (i.e. passwords) for roles that you'd like to assign to collaborators within Mathesar. Mathesar will display all [LOGIN roles](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/role-attributes.html#ROLE-ATTRIBUTES) that exist on the server.

- Click **Configure in Mathesar** to store the role's password in Mathesar and allow the role to be associated with collaborators.

- Click **Configure Password** to update the password of an already configured role.

- Click **Remove** to remove Mathesar's stored password for a role. The role will remain on the server.

### _In Mathesar:_ Collaborators {:#collaborators}

> A "collaborator" is a Mathesar users who has access to a database through a specific PostgreSQL sole.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A "collaborator" is a Mathesar user who has access to a database through a specific PostgreSQL role.
```

    !!! example
        A role can be granted the `CREATE` privilege on a schema. This allows the role to create new tables within the schema.

- **Ownership**: Every PostgreSQL object has one and only one role said to be its "owner". The owner generally can do anything directly to the object, but not necessarily other objects contained within it. By default the owner is set to the role which created the object.

- **Shared ownership:** While PostgreSQL has a variety of granular privileges for different actions, there are still certain actions which remain restricted to object owners. For example only the owner of a table can add new columns to it.

    While this behavior may seem limiting, it's still possible configure multiple roles to effectively "own" a single object by leveraging PostgreSQL's powerful role inheritance functionality:
    
    1. We can create a third role to directly own the object and act as a sort of proxy "group". (The group role doesn't need to be a `LOGIN` role and thus doesn't require a password to be configured.)
    1. Then we can grant _that group role_ to any other roles we'd like.

>     1. Those granted roles will then have permission do things _as if they were the owner themselves_.

Reviewer: There is no instruction on how to do this via our UI. Do we add them?

We call them 'child roles' on the UI.

Reviewer 2: Step-by-step instructions for configuring shared ownership would probably be useful. But I don't think it's high enough priority to add right now.

I pushed e7fc8e142fc10b6995e169b977b524c5243748e8 to change "granted roles" to "child roles". Thanks for that suggestion.
